KIP-81: Implementing the on-chain governance voting method (#81)
klaytn/kips: KIPs/kip-81.md

---
kip: 81

> title: Changing GC Voting Methods

Reviewer: Can we make the title more descriptive of the purpose of this change?

author: Yeriel<yeriel.lee@krustuniverse.com>, Daniel<daniel.cc@krustuniverse.com>, Aidan<aidan.kwon@krustuniverse.com>, Ollie<ollie.j@krustuniverse.com>, Eddie<eddie.kim0@krustuniverse.com>
discussion-to: https://govforum.klaytn.foundation/t/discussion-changing-gc-voting-method/19

> status: Last Call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: Draft
```

type: Standards Track 
category: Core
created: 2022-09-19
---

## Simple Summary

> Introducing a new governance voting method based on the staking amount and implementation of the governance portal, Klaytn Square 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introducing a new governance voting method based on staking amount and the implementation of the governance portal, Klaytn Square 
```

 
## Abstract

> Klaytn introduces a stake-based governance model that provides voting power to governance participants. Currently, one vote per Governance Council(GC) member was cast. The new method will introduce the voting right that will be exercised based on the staking amount with the maximum cap to prevent an entity from making an arbitrary decision. This model ultimately enables each member to gather support from Klaytn communities in line with their preference. The new system aims to provide responsibility and obligation of voting to Governance Councils. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Klaytn introduces a stake-based governance model that provides voting power to governance participants. Currently, one Governance Council (GC) member can cast one vote. The new method will introduce a voting right that will be exercised based on the staking amount with a maximum cap to prevent a certain entity from making an arbitrary decision. This model ultimately enables each member to gather support from Klaytn communities in line with their preference. The new system aims to give responsibility and obligation to the Governance Council members to vote.
```

## Motivation

> To enhance individual voting power and promote ultimate decentralization, we aim to accomplish an equal proposer selection structure. The change of voting method provides more power and influence to GC members who share the same interest and values as that of Klaytn by staking and locking up more KLAYs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enhance individual voting power and promote ultimate decentralization, we aim to accomplish an equal proposer selection structure. With the change of the voting method, GC members who share the same interest and values as Klaytn can gain more power and influence by staking and locking up more KLAY.
```

## Specification

The Klaytn governance voting system is designed based on the following fundamental premises. 
- We believe Klaytn’s major decision-making process should reflect the opinions of as many participants as possible from the ecosystem. 

> - We assumed that participants will be more likely to make a decision that is beneficial to the Klaytn ecosystem if they hold more KLAY. This is based on the premise that the growth of Klaytn’s ecosystem is correlated to the rise in the value of KLAY. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We assumed that participants are more likely to make a decision that is beneficial to the Klaytn ecosystem if they hold more KLAY. This is based on the premise that the growth of Klaytn’s ecosystem is correlated with the rise in the value of KLAY. 
```

- The governance system should be able to manage the situations in which a particular entity makes an arbitrary decision. This is because the entity may weaken the sustainability of the entire network. 
- The act of voting and the gain of voting power is different. 

> The Governance Council can exercise the right to vote based on the staking amount. Currently, each GC member receives at least 1 voting right regardless of the number of KLAY they hold. Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Governance Council members can exercise the right to vote based on the staking amount. Currently, each GC member receives at least 1 voting right regardless of the number of KLAY they hold. Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive. 
```

> Therefore, the GC will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 500 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a governance council can own is one less than the total number of governance council members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. The 1 KLAY: 1 vote structure prevents the tragedy of the commons and prevents potential monopolies by limiting the maximum number of votes cast. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, the GC member will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 500 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a GC member can own is one less than the total number of members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. The 1 KLAY: 1 vote structure prevents the tragedy of the commons and potential monopolies by limiting the maximum number of votes cast. 
```

> The foundation will provide `votingDelay` (initial configuration: 7 days)  of the notice period and ‘votingPeriod’ of the voting period (initial configuration: 7 days). The list of eligible voters is finalized at the start of the notice period. The qualified electors and voting power of those will be counted at the start of the voting period. The foundation or GC can freely propose and discuss on the forum. Once the discussion is held on the forum, the foundation will put the topic to a vote on the governance portal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The foundation will provide `votingDelay` (initial configuration: 7 days) of the notice period and `votingPeriod` of the voting period (initial configuration: 7 days). The list of eligible voters is finalized at the start of the notice period. The qualified electors and voting power of those will be counted at the start of the voting period. The foundation or GC can freely propose and discuss on the forum. Once the discussion is held on the forum, the foundation will put the topic to a vote on the governance portal. 
```

Reviewer: 1. It could be better to have a diagram to describe `votingDelay` and `votingPeriod`. Is it possible to overlap the two period?
2. In the diagram, it would be good if we specify when the list of eligible voters are finalized.
3. What kind of vote topics that "the foundation and GC can freely propose and discuss"?

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 
1. I will add a linear diagram describing all successful states (pending to execution) with their respective periods.
  - No they do not overlap. They are consecutive. `votingDelay` defines the Pending period and `votingPeriod` defines the Active period.
2. Yes the diagram will contain both "voter finalizing time" and "voting power finalizing time".
3. I don't think we have an explicit list of allowed topics. Should we add a few examples?

Reviewer: @blukat29 
1.2. Let's discuss after the digram is done. Thanks.
3. I don't think we should add few examples, but I just want to know how it is exactly processed. Maybe it could be good to include this too.
For example, the foundation and GC first propose a topic to forum, then if it seems like settled, then it goes to the on-chain voting process. Is this right description of what you thought? Please also include this kinds of information to the diagram you will draw. Thanks.

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21
1, 2. Please refer to the latest "Voting contract" section.
3. Yes. First, discuss on Forum, then on-chain voting on Portal. Refer to the "Specification" section.

The newly implemented governance portal includes the following functions: 
- Ability to propose and vote on a variety of opinions

> - Information about Governance Council members who are working together for the Klaytn ecosystem

Reviewer: What do you mean by "working together"? Can we more elaborate what kind of information will be shown in the governance portal more specifically?

Reviewer 3: The clause "who are working together...," simply describes who Governance Council members are.

The information should contain entity names, social media accounts, and staking contract addresses.
I think the information is not significant to the on-chain voting but mentioned here for a complete description of the Governance Portal.

> - Information about Governance Councils who are working together for the Klaytn ecosystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Information about Governance Council members who are working together for the Klaytn ecosystem
```

> The Klaytn governance voting system will be conducted on smart contracts. The contract design is influenced by Compound Finance and OpenZeppelin. The accounts interacting with the contracts can have proposer, voter, or executor roles.

Reviewer: Can we add links to Compound Finance and OpenZeppelin?

Reviewer: > proposer, voter, or executor roles.

Need to describe the roles.

Reviewer 3: 1. I will add links.
2. The roles are described in the following paragraphs.

Reviewer: @blukat29 Thanks!

> A proposer submits and initiates governance proposals. The voting timeline starts with the submission of proposals to the voting contract. A proposal describes the changes to be made on the Klaytn blockchain.

Reviewer: > A proposer submits and initiates governance proposals.

1. to where? in the forum? Is it stored in a smart contract?
2. Is the proposal a document, or a smart contract?

> A proposal describes the changes to be made on the Klaytn blockchain.

3. Is there any opportunity that the proposal does not make a change to the blockchain protocol? What about KIR approval?

Reviewer 3: 1. Paragraphs after "Implementation plan" solely describe smart contracts. A proposer address (account) will send a transaction to the Voting contract to store the contents in the contract.
2. A proposal consists of descriptions and optional on-chain transactions. I will elaborate more in detail about the Voting contract.
3. Yes the transaction is entirely optional. If a proposal doesn't contain transactions, its state only advances until Passed, Failed, or Canceled states.

> A proposal not only contains textual descriptions of the change, but it may also include  specifications of attached transactions, or actions. The actions are executed on behalf of a voting contract after the proposal passes. The actions extend the impact of proposals from simply gathering opinions to automatically implementing changes on the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A proposal not only contains textual descriptions of the change, but it may also include specifications of attached transactions, or actions. The actions are executed on behalf of a voting contract after the proposal passes. The actions extend the impact of proposals from simply gathering opinions to automatically implementing changes on the blockchain.
```

> A voter casts votes on the proposal during the voting period. A voter can vote for yes, no, or abstain with all the votes assigned to the voter. The list of voters for each proposal is determined at the proposal submission. The number of votes is determined by the amount of staked KLAYs at the start of the voting period.

Reviewer: Unclear when the voting period starts.
If we have two proposals, what is the voting period?
- The first proposal submitted on Sep. 20th. -> voting period: 20th ~ 27th
- The second proposal submitted on Sep. 21st -> voting period: 21th ~ 28th
Is this right?

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 There will be 7days of notice period, and then 7days of voting period.
- First proposal submitted on Sep 10th 00:00
  - notice period 10th 00:00 to 17th 00:00, voting period 17th 00:00 to 24th 00:00
- Second proposal submitted on Sep 11th 00:00
  - notice period 11th 00:00 to 18th 00:00, voting period 18th 00:00 to 25th 00:00.

Please refer to "Voting contract" section and timing diagram.

> An executor triggers the execution of attached transactions in passed proposals. The execution is subdivided into two steps. First, the executor queues the transactions. After a set amount of delay, the executor can send the transactions. Execution delay here gives enough time for the community to recognize the upcoming change and perform a final check about the transaction.

Reviewer: How the delay is set? in the proposal? or by the executor?

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Please refer to "Voting contract" section and timing diagram.

A proposal is in one of the following states.

> - Pending: Proposer submitted the proposal but voting has not started. The pending state lasts for votingDelay, or 7 days. This state is also called the notice period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pending: Proposer submitted the proposal but voting has not started. The pending state lasts for `votingDelay` (a.k.a. the notice period, 7 days for initial configuration). 
```

I don't think this is the right sentence:
"The pending state is also called the notice period."

> - Active: Ongoing voting. Voters can cast their votes. The active state lasts for votingPeriod, or 7 days. This state is also called the voting period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Active: Ongoing voting. Voters can cast their votes. The active state lasts for `votingPeriod` (a.k.a. the voting period, 7 days for initial configuration).
```

Reviewer 3: The exact number (7 days) is now presented in a separate table.

> - Canceled: Proposer has canceled the proposal before execution. Any further interaction is prohibited.

Reviewer: on which condition (or state) proposer can cancel the proposal?

Reviewer 3: The proposer can cancel a proposal at Pending/Active/Passed/Queued states. Is there anything confusing about the rule?

> - Passed: Voting finalized and quorum reached. Executor shall queue the actions before a set timeout of queueTimeout, or 7 days. If the proposal contains no actions, any further interaction is prohibited. Otherwise, the proposal can proceed to Queued and Executed states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Passed: Voting finalized and quorum reached. An executor shall queue the actions before a set timeout of queueTimeout, or 7 days. If the proposal contains no actions, any further interaction is prohibited. Otherwise, the proposal can proceed to Queued and Executed states.
```

1. We need to define `queueTimeout` before this description. What about defining all parameters or variables as a table?
2. If the proposal contains no actions, what is the next state of this proposal?

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21
1. Added tables describing important timings
2. Added a sentence "If the proposal contains no actions, any further interaction is prohibited." in Passed state description.

- Failed: Voting finalized but has not reached quorum. Any further interaction is prohibited.
- Queued: An executor has queued the actions. An executor cannot trigger the actions while a certain duration of execDelay, or 2 days.
- Executed: An executor has triggered the actions after the execution delay. The executor shall trigger the actions before a set timeout of execTimeout, or 7 days. The execTimeout starts at the end of execDelay.

> - Expired: Executor has not queued or executed within respective timeouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Expired: An executor has not queued or executed within respective timeouts.
```

![proposal state diagram](../assets/kip-81/proposal_state_diagram.png)

> For a proposal to pass, two quorum conditions must be satisfied. The first condition is the turnout. Either the number of voters exceeds 1/3 of all voters, or the sum of casted votes exceeds 1/3 of all eligible votes. The second condition is supported. The yes votes must exceed the half of casted votes.

Reviewer: > The second condition is supported.

Why this sentence is added? Others does not support this condition?

Reviewer 3: I will rephrase the sentences.

> The second condition is support rate; yes votes must exceed the half of casted votes.

The word 'support' comes from the OpenZeppelin's [Governor](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/governance/IGovernor.sol#L84) contract. It's a variable representing the direction of a vote (yes/no/abstain)

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Refined the pass condition using a pseudo-boolean expression.

```
CountQuorum: At least 1/3 of all eligible voters cast vote
PowerQuorum: At least 1/3 of all eligible voting powers cast vote
SupportRate: Yes votes is more than half of casted votes
Pass = (CountQuorum or PowerQuorum) and SupportRate
```

Please refer to  the "Voting contract" section.

> The amount of votes are calculated from the amount of stakes KLAY. GC members stake their KLAY by locking in a special smart contract called CnStakingContract. Each member must deploy at least one CnStakingContract and deposit KLAY there. The official addresses of CnStakingContract are managed in another special smart contract called AddressBook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The amount of votes are calculated from the amount of staked KLAY. GC members stake their KLAY by locking in a special smart contract called CnStakingContract. Each member must deploy at least one CnStakingContract and deposit KLAY there. The official addresses of CnStakingContract are managed in another special smart contract called AddressBook.
```

> The amounts of votes are calculated from the amounts of stakes KLAY. GC members stake their KLAY by locking in a special smart contract called CnStakingContract. Each GC must deploy at least one CnStakingContract and deposit KLAY there. The official addresses of CnStakingContract are managed in another special smart contract called AddressBook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The amount of votes are calculated from the amount of stakes KLAY. GC members stake their KLAY by locking in a special smart contract called CnStakingContract. Each member must deploy at least one CnStakingContract and deposit KLAY there. The official addresses of CnStakingContract are managed in another special smart contract called AddressBook.
```

> Each GC member can appoint a voter account that will cast votes on behalf of the KLAYs in its CnStakingContracts. The voter account is necessary because CnStakingContract itself cannot send transactions to cast votes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each GC member can appoint a voter account that will cast votes on behalf of the KLAY in its CnStakingContracts. The voter account is necessary because CnStakingContract itself cannot send transactions to cast votes.
```

![gc voting structure](../assets/kip-81/gc_voting_structure.png)
  
Staked balances and voter accounts are tracked in a new special smart contract named StakingTracker. StakingTracker stores the voter list and their voting powers for each voting period. CnStakingContract must notify StakingTracker to recognize any balance changes. Below is an example of StakingTracker contract interface.
```solidity
interface IStakingTracker {

  struct Tracker {
    // this struct is updated only if trackStart <= block.number <= trackEnd.
    uint64 trackStart;
    uint64 trackEnd;

    // List of eligible nodes and their staking contracts.
    // Determined at createTracker() and won’t change.
    address[] nodeIds;
    mapping(address => address) stakingToNodeId;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

double line breaks.

    // Balances and voting powers of each nodes.
    // Updated by notifyStake() and notifyWithdraw().
    mapping(address => uint256) nodeBalances;
    mapping(address => uint256) votingPowers;
    uint256 totalVotes;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

double line breaks.

    // Appointed voters list
    // Updated by appointVoter().
    mapping(address => address) nodeIdToVoter;
    mapping(address => address) voterToNodeId;
  }

>   // Called by Voting at proposal submission, to finalize voter list.

Reviewer: What is `Voting`? Is this another contract?

Reviewer 3: I will add a list of contracts when we start describing the smart contracts.

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Please refer to the "Smart contract specification" section.

  function createTracker(uint256 trackEnd) public returns (uint trackerId);

  // Called by CnStakingContract whenever its balance changes.
  function notifyStake(uint256 amount) public;
  function notifyWithdraw(uint256 amount) public;

>   /// Called by Governance admin or CnStaking admins to change voter account.

Reviewer: How can this function authorize governance admin or staking admin?

Reviewer 3: I will explain it in a sample implementation.

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Refer to sample implementation in "StakingTracker contract" section.
The call must come from a CnStakingV2 contract. StakingTracker can verify the `msg.sender` with the `stakingToNodeId` mapping.

  function appointVoter(address nodeId, address voter) public;

  /// Called by Voting to calculate voting outcome.
  function getVotingPower(uint trackerId, address voter)
    public view returns(uint256);
  function quorums(uint trackerId)
    public view returns(uint quorumCount, uint quorumPower); 
}

> ```

Reviewer: It also could be good to provide an example implementation of StakingTracer for better understanding of the interfaces.

Reviewer 3: I will add a simplfied implementation.

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Refer to sample implementation in "StakingTracker contract" section.

## Expected Effect
The proposed GC Voting method is expected to produce the following changes:

> - All members in Klaytn ecosystem grow together with credibility 
> - Providing obligation and authority to GC motivates active participation in governance voting activities and the KLAY staking 
> - Anyone can easily view the proposals and voting status through the governance portal. It encourages holders to participate and give responsibility and authority to GCs.
> - The Klaytn network can take a step closer to transparency and decentralized networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All members in the Klaytn ecosystem grow together with credibility 
- Entrusting obligation and authority to GC members motivates active participation in governance voting activities and KLAY staking 
- Anyone can easily view the proposals and voting status through the governance portal. It encourages holders to participate and give responsibility and authority to the GC members.
- The Klaytn network can take a step closer to transparency and decentralization.
```

 
## Backward Compatibility

> n/a

Reviewer: Is this compatible with previous versions? anything breaks compatibility?

Reviewer 3: GCs should migrate from existing CnStaking contracts to an updated CnStaking contract (CnStakingV2).
I will add explanation.

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 Added the backward compatibility section.

There is no change in Klaytn core. But GCs should deploy a new CnStakingV2 contract to participate in on-chain voting.

 
## Abstract
Klaytn introduces a stake-based governance model that provides voting power to governance participants. Currently, one vote per Governance Council(GC) member was cast. The new method will introduce the voting right that will be exercised based on the staking amount with the maximum cap to prevent an entity from making an arbitrary decision. The voting agenda is determined through discussion on the Klaytn Governance Forum, and the topic will be presented and voted on at the newly launched Governance Portal, Klaytn Square. This voting mechanism aims to provide responsibility and obligation of voting to Governance Councils.  

## Motivation
The new on-chain voting mechanism discloses GC’s opinion transparently through the public forum and the portal, allowing anyone to view the result. Through Klaytn Governance Forum, non-GC members can also participate in the conversation about governance agenda. This change provides more power and influence to GC members who share the same interest and values as that of Klaytn by staking and locking up more KLAYs. Moreover, this method ultimately promotes decentralization. 

## Specification

> Klaytn Governance Forum allows the general public, developers and governance councils to freely propose and discuss on Klaytn governance items. Once Klaytn Square, the governance portal, opens, the on-chain voting will be executed based on the discussion held in this forum.

Reviewer: Klaytn Governance Forum and Klaytn Square are different ones, right? How do you want to manage the two sites? Will they be combined into one after the launch of Klaytn Square?

Author: The discussion will be first held in the Klaytn Governance Forum. Then, the agenda will be voted on Klaytn Square. They will be managed separately. I have edited the KIP-81, clarifying the process and the difference between these two websites. The foundation will administrate these two sites, currently defining the process.

The newly implemented governance portal includes the following functions:

> - Ability to propose and vote on a variety of opinions

Reviewer: This will be handled in forum, right?

Author: The content in line 23 will be handled in the forum (until the agenda is posted on Klaytn Square). I have clarified and updated KIP-81.

> - Information about Governance Councils who are working together for the Klaytn ecosystem

Reviewer: Can you more specify what kind of information could be handled in this website?

Author: I have updated KIP-81, specifying the type of information provided in the portal and voting feature.

![voting process diagram](../assets/kip-81/voting_process_diagram.png)

> The foundation will provide 7 days of notice period for voting, providing a time to adjust the staking amount. With the start of the voting, the foundation will announce the list of GC members and their voting power. GC will have 7 days of the voting period. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure "notice period for voting" is the right term to describe the period. Candidates in my thought are:
- staking period
- preparation period for voting

It could be better to find more appropriate term for this period.

Reviewer: And it could be better to specify why this period is needed.

Author: I have revised the notice period to the preparation period. The purpose of this period is indicated - as "providing a time to adjust the staking amount."

Reviewer 3: Please review the "Voting steps" paragraph of updated document (https://github.com/yeri-lee/kips/blob/master/KIPs/kip-81.md#voting-steps)

### Smart Contract Specification

The Klaytn on-chain governance voting will be conducted on smart contracts. There are several contracts involved in on-chain governance.

- **AddressBook**: An [existing contract](https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/blob/v1.9.1/contracts/reward/contract/AddressBook.sol) that holds the list of GC nodes, their staking contract and reward recipient addresses.
- **CnStakingV2**: An updated version of the [existing CnStakingContract](https://github.com/klaytn/klaytn/blob/v1.9.1/contracts/cnstaking/CnStakingContract.sol). V2 adds the balance notification and voter account appointing features.
- **StakingTracker**: A new contract that tracks voting-related information from AddressBook and CnStakingV2 contracts. Accumulated information is served to Voting contract.

> - **Voting**: A new contract that oversees the on-chain voting process. Voting contract stores proposals, record votes, and send transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Voting**: A new contract that oversees the on-chain voting process. Voting contract stores proposals, records votes, and sends transactions.
```

- The act of voting and the gain of voting power is different.

The Governance Council can exercise the right to vote based on the staking amount. Currently, each GC member receives at least 1 voting right regardless of the number of KLAY they hold. Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive.

Therefore, the GC will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 5 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a governance council can own is one less than the total number of governance council members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. The 5 M KLAY: 1 vote with cap structure prevents potential monopolies by limiting the maximum number of votes cast.

> ### Smart Contract Specification

Reviewer: It could be good to have interface classes for all the smart contracts.

Reviewer 3: The updated document has all or relevant interfaces of those 4 contracts.

```solidity
abstract contract Voting {
  struct Proposal {
    string description;  // human readable description
    address[] targets;   // 0 or more transactions
    uint256[] values;
    bytes[] calldatas;
  }
}
```

A proposer can submit governance proposals by calling `propose()` function. The voting timeline starts with the submission of proposals to the voting contract. A proposer can also cancel a proposal she has submitted, if the proposal had not been executed yet.

A voter casts votes on behalf of one of the GCs. The vote choice is one of yes, no, or abstain.

An executor triggers the execution of attached transactions in passed proposals. The execution is subdivided into two steps. First, the executor queues the transactions. After a set amount of delay, the executor can send the transactions. Execution delay here gives enough time for the community to recognize the upcoming change and perform a final check about the transaction.

There will be a secretariat account stored in the Voting contract. The account is initially managed by the Klaytn Foundation, and later it can be replaced by governance voting. The secretariat has the proposer and executor role.

```solidity

> abstract contract Voting {

Reviewer: Can we specify more about how we can propose, queue, and execute the proposals?

Reviewer: I'm not sure how the transactions actually executed on-chain with this info.

Reviewer 3: I added a code snippet that executes the transactions from arrays.
Please review the "executing transactions" section in updated document (https://github.com/yeri-lee/kips/blob/master/KIPs/kip-81.md#executing-transactions)

Reviewer 3: Using arrays of (target, value, calldata) is a common way of storing and executing multiple transactions.
https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/master/contracts/governance/Governor.sol#L316
https://github.com/makerdao/multicall/blob/master/src/Multicall.sol

  function propose(
    string description, address[] targets, uint256[] values, bytes[] calldatas)
    virtual returns (uint256 proposalId);
  function cancel(uint256 proposalId) virtual;

  enum VoteChoice{ Unknown, Yes, No, Abstain };
  function castVote(uint256 proposalId, uint32 choice) virtual;

  function queue(uint256 proposalId) virtual onlyExecutor;
  function execute(uint256 proposalId) virtual onlyExecutor;
}
```

Following timing parameters influence the Voting contract.

| Name              | Meaning                                                                                   | Value     |
|----------------   |----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   |--------   |
| `votingDelay`     | Delay from proposal submission to voting start. Equals to the length of Pending state.    | 7 days    |
| `votingPeriod`    | Duration of the voting. Equals the length of Active state.                                | 7 days    |
| `queueTimeout`    | Grace period given to executors for queue() passed proposals.                             | 7 days    |

> | `execDelay`       | A minimum delay before a queued transaction can be executed.                              | 2 days    |

Reviewer: execDelay is set per each transaction?
For example, if we have multiple transactions T1, T2, and T3 for proposal P1 and transactions T4 and T5 for proposal P2, how is the exacDelay set?

Reviewer 3: For now, the timing settings are global and constant.
We'll need to discuss whether we should allow flexible timing for each proposal.

| `startBlock`      | Voting start block `proposedBlock + votingDelay`.                                                                                                                         |
| `endBlock`        | Voting end block `startBlock + votingPeriod`. An executor should queue transactions in the proposal before `endBlock + queueTimeout`, otherwise the proposal expires.     |
| `queuedBlock`     | The block number where `queue()` was called. An executor should trigger the transaction after `queuedBlock + execDelay`, before `queuedBlock + execDelay + execTimeout`.  |

The timings are illustrated in below diagram.

![proposal timing](../assets/kip-81/proposal_timing.png)

A proposal is in one of the following states.

- **Pending**: Proposer submitted the proposal but voting has not started. The pending state lasts for `votingDelay`. This state is also called the **notice period**.
- **Active**: Ongoing voting. Voters can cast their votes. The active state lasts for `votingPeriod`. This state is also called the **voting period**.
- **Canceled**: Proposer has canceled the proposal before execution. Any further interaction is prohibited.

> - **Passed**: Voting finalized and quorum reached. An executor shall queue the actions before a set timeout of `queueTimeout`. If the proposal contains no actions, any further interaction is prohibited. Otherwise, the proposal can proceed to Queued and Executed states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Passed**: Voting finalized and a quorum reached. An executor shall queue the actions before a set timeout of `queueTimeout`. If the proposal contains no actions, any further interaction is prohibited. Otherwise, the proposal can proceed to Queued and Executed states.
```

> - **Failed**: Voting finalized but has not reached quorum. Any further interaction is prohibited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Failed**: Voting finalized but has not reached a quorum. Any further interaction is prohibited.
```

- **Queued**: An executor has queued the actions. An executor cannot trigger the actions while a certain duration of `execDelay`.
- **Executed**: An executor has triggered the actions after the execution delay. The executor shall trigger the actions before a set timeout of `execTimeout`. The `execTimeout` starts at the end of `execDelay`.

> - **Expired**: Executor has not queued or executed within respective timeouts.

Reviewer: Is there any penalty if the executor does not execute the transactions?

Reviewer 3: No there is no penalty for not executing the transactions.

![proposal state diagram](../assets/kip-81/proposal_state_diagram.png)

A proposal passes when a combination of the following conditions are met.
- *CountQuorum*: At least 1/3 of all eligible voters cast vote
- *PowerQuorum*: At least 1/3 of all eligible voting powers cast vote

> - *SupportRate*: Yes votes is more than half of casted votes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *SupportRate*: Yes votes are more than half of casted votes
```

- Per-GC votes: to process voting requests (i.e. calls to Voting contract).
- Per-GC voting accounts: to process voting requests (i.e. calls to Voting contract).

The data are collected on a per-proposal basis. For each proposal, a Tracker data structure is created and updated until a specified block.

```solidity
interface IStakingTracker {
  struct Tracker {
    // this struct is updated only if trackStart <= block.number < trackEnd.
    uint64 trackStart; // when this Tracker is created
    uint64 trackEnd;   // specified by createTracker(), voting startBlock.

    // List of eligible nodes and their staking contracts.
    // Determined at createTracker() and won’t change.
    address[] nodeIds;
    mapping(address => address) stakingToNodeId;

    // Balances and voting powers of each nodes.
    // Updated by notifyStake().
    mapping(address => uint256) stakingBalances;
    mapping(address => uint256) nodeBalances;
    mapping(address => uint256) votingPowers;
    uint256 totalVotes;

    // Appointed voters list
    // Updated by appointVoter().
    mapping(address => address) nodeIdToVoter;
    mapping(address => address) voterToNodeId;

>   }

Reviewer: It would be good if we define prototypes of the functions in this contracts.

Reviewer 3: The StakingTracker interface and example implementations are given in the updated document (https://github.com/yeri-lee/kips/blob/master/KIPs/kip-81.md#stakingtracker)

  function appointVoter(address _voter) public {
    for (uint i=0; i < liveTrackers.length; i++) {
      if (block.number >= trackers[i].trackEnd) {
        deleteArrayElem(liveTrackers, i);
        continue;
      }
      address nodeId = trackers[i].stakingToNodeId[msg.sender];
      if (nodeId == address(0)) {
        continue;
      }
      uint256 oldVoter = trackers[i].nodeIdToVoter[nodeId];
      uint256 newVoter = _voter;
      trackers[i].voterToNodeId[oldVoter] = address(0);
      trackers[i].voterToNodeId[newVoter] = nodeId;
      trackers[i].nodeIdToVoter[nodeId] = newvoter;
    }
  }
}
```

## Expected Effect
The proposed GC Voting method is expected to produce the following changes:
- All members in Klaytn ecosystem grow together with credibility 
- Providing obligation and authority to GC motivates active participation in governance voting activities and the KLAY staking 
- Anyone can easily view the proposals and voting status through the governance portal. It encourages holders to participate and give responsibility and authority to GCs.
- The Klaytn network can take a step closer to transparency and decentralized networks.
 
## Backward Compatibility

> - GCs must deploy new CnStakingV2 contracts and move their staked KLAYs. Existing CnStaking contract balances are excluded from voting power calculation.

Reviewer: Is it okay to use old CnStaking contract if the GC does not want to have voting power?

Reviewer 3: Yes, such GC would have 0 voting power but still can participate in block validation.
I've reworded must -> should.

        // ...
        _to.transfer(_value);
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function withdrawApprovedStaking(uint256 _approvedWithdrawalId) {
        // ...
        _to.transfer(_value);
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function updateVoterAddress(address _addr) {
        // ...
        voterAddress = _addr;
        stakingTracker.refreshVoter(address(this));
    }
}

interface IStakingTracker {
    /// @dev Re-evaluate Tracker contents related to the staking contract
    /// @param staking  The CnStaking contract address
    function refreshStake(address staking) external;

    /// @dev Update a GC's voter address from given address
    /// @param staking  The CnStaking contract address
    function refreshVoter(address staking) external;
}
```

#### Version identifier

To distinguish the CnStakingContract and CnStakingV2 contracts, V2 will have VERSION value 2.

```solidity
abstract contract CnStakingV2 {
    uint256 constant public VERSION = 2;
}
```

### StakingTracker

StakingTracker collects voting related data of each GC.

- Staking amounts and voting powers \

> Stored separately in Tracker struct for each tracking period. During the tracking period voting powers can change, but becomes immutable after the period ends. The tracker struct is first created in `createTracker()`, and updated by `refreshStake()`

Reviewer 4: The definition of tracking period needs to be established.
Also, maybe add it in the below figure along with other periods?

Reviewer 3: I've removed the term 'tracking period' and explained using `trackStart` and `trackEnd`.

- Each GC’s voter accounts \
Stored in global mappings, and can be updated any time. Voter account mappings are updated by `refreshVoter()`

#### Contract interface

```solidity
abstract contract StakingTracker {
    struct Tracker {
        // Tracker is only updated if trackStart <= block.number < trackEnd.
        uint256 trackStart;
        uint256 trackEnd;

        // List of eligible nodes and their staking addresses.

>         // Initialized by crateTracker().

Reviewer 4: crate -> create

        address[] nodeIds;
        mapping(address => address) rewardToNodeId;
        mapping(address => address) stakingToNodeId;

        // Balances and voting powers.

>         // Initialized by crateTracker() and updated by refreshStake().

Reviewer 4: crate -> create

        mapping(address => uint256) stakingBalances;
        mapping(address => uint256) nodeBalances;
        mapping(address => uint256) nodeVotes;
        uint256 totalVotes;
        uint256 eligibleNodes;
    }

>     // Tracker objects. Added by createdTracker().

Reviewer 4: created -> create

#### Proposals have expired state

Proposal transactions expires if they are not queued or executed within deadline. This guarantees the timeliness of the transactions. If a proposal was left unexecuted for a long time, the proposal might be irrelevant anymore and require a fresh proposal.

## Expected Effect

The proposed GC Voting method is expected to produce the following changes:
- All members in Klaytn ecosystem grow together with credibility 
- Providing obligation and authority to GC motivates active participation in governance voting activities and the KLAY staking 
- Anyone can easily view the proposals and voting status through the governance portal. It encourages holders to participate and give responsibility and authority to GCs.
- The Klaytn network can take a step closer to transparency and decentralized networks.
 
## Backward Compatibility

- GCs should deploy new CnStakingV2 contracts and move their staked KLAYs. Existing CnStaking contract balances are excluded from voting power calculation.

> - However, block validator selection is not affected by the change, so GCs can still participate in consensus until migrating to CnStakingV2.

Reviewer 4: until -> before

- The act of voting and the gain of voting power is different.

The Governance Council can exercise the right to vote based on the staking amount. Currently, each GC member receives at least 1 voting right regardless of the number of KLAY they hold. Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive.

Therefore, the GC will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 5 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a governance council can own is one less than the total number of governance council members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. The 5 M KLAY: 1 vote with cap structure prevents potential monopolies by limiting the maximum number of votes cast.

### Smart Contracts Overview

> The Klaytn on-chain governance voting will be conducted on smart contracts. Several contracts and accounts interact together in the process. Below diagram shows the relationship between contracts and acounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Klaytn on-chain governance voting will be conducted on smart contracts. Several contracts and accounts interact together in the process. Below diagram shows the relationship between contracts and accounts.
```

- Contracts
  - **AddressBook**: An existing contract that stores the list of GC nodes, their staking contracts, and their reward recipient addresses.
  - **CnStakingV2**: An updated version of existing CnStakingContract. GCs stake their KLAYs to earn rights to validate blocks and cast on-chain votes.
  - **StakingTracker**: A new contract that tracks voting related data from AddressBook and CnStakingV2 contracts.

>   - **Voting**: A new contract that processes the on-chain voting. It stores governance proposals, count votes, and send approved transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Voting**: A new contract that processes the on-chain voting. It stores governance proposals, counts votes, and sends approved transactions.
```

> - Accounts

Reviewer: @blukat29 Can we specify which accounts is controlled by which contracts?

Reviewer 3: Updated 5ad7de3

        address[] memory nodeIds,
        address[] memory stakingContracts,
        address[] memory rewardAddresses,
        address pocAddress,
        address kirAddress);
}
```

### CnStakingV2

CnStakingV2 is an upgraded version of CnStakingContract. The CnStakingContract has been serving the purpose of locking GC stakes. V2 will add two new features related to StakingTracker, which will be described later.

- Whenever its KLAY balance changes, V2 notifies the StakingTracker.
- V2 stores a voter account address, and notifies the StakingTracker whenever it changes. The voter account can be changed by its admins.

To support the new features, following functions are added.

```solidity
abstract contract CnStakingV2 {
    event UpdateStakingTracker(address stakingTracker);
    event UpdateVoterAddress(address voterAddress);

    IStakingTracker public stakingTracker;
    address public voterAddress;

    /// @dev Set the initial stakingTracker address
    /// Emits an UpdateStakingTracker event.
    /// This function only works before contract initialization
    function setStakingTracker(address _tracker) external beforeInit;

>     /// @dev Update the StakingTracker address this contract points to

Reviewer: @blukat29 It seems like `updateStakingTracker` function also emits `UpdateStakingTracker`. Is this right?

Reviewer 3: Updated f450b5b.

To notify balance and voter account changes to StakingTracker contract, CnStakingV2 contract shall call the StakingTracker whenever after every change. For example,

```solidity
abstract contract CnStakingV2 {
    function depositLockupStakingAndInit() payable beforeInit() {
        // ...
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function stakeKlay() payable {
        // ...
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function withdrawLockupStaking(address _to, uint256 _value) {
        // ...
        _to.transfer(_value);
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function withdrawApprovedStaking(uint256 _approvedWithdrawalId) {
        // ...
        _to.transfer(_value);
        stakingTracker.refreshStake(address(this));
    }
    function updateVoterAddress(address _addr) {
        // ...
        voterAddress = _addr;
        stakingTracker.refreshVoter(address(this));
    }
}

interface IStakingTracker {
    /// @dev Re-evaluate Tracker contents related to the staking contract
    /// @param staking  The CnStaking contract address
    function refreshStake(address staking) external;

>     /// @dev Update a GC's voter address from given address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// @dev Update a GC's voter address from the given address
```

    /// @param staking  The CnStaking contract address
    function refreshVoter(address staking) external;
}
```

#### Version identifier

To distinguish the CnStakingContract and CnStakingV2 contracts, V2 will have VERSION value 2.

```solidity
abstract contract CnStakingV2 {
    uint256 constant public VERSION = 2;
}
```

### StakingTracker

> StakingTracker collects voting related data of each GC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
StakingTracker collects voting related data of each GC member.
```

Governance Council member looks better to me instead of Governance Council. What do you think?

- Staking amounts and voting powers \

> Stored separately in `Tracker` structs. Each `Tracker` struct can be updated between `trackStart` and `trackEnd` blocks, but becomes immutable afterwards, essentially freezing the voting powers. A `Tracker` struct is first created in `createTracker()`, and updated by `refreshStake()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stored separately in `Tracker` structs. Each `Tracker` struct can be updated between `trackStart` and `trackEnd` blocks, but becomes immutable afterwards, essentially freezing the voting powers. A `Tracker` struct is first created in `createTracker()`, and updated by `refreshStake()`.
```

- Each GC’s voter accounts \

> Stored in global mappings, and can be updated any time. Voter account mappings are updated by `refreshVoter()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stored in global mappings, and can be updated any time. Voter account mappings are updated by `refreshVoter()`.
```

#### Contract interface

```solidity
abstract contract StakingTracker {
    struct Tracker {
        // Tracker is only updated if trackStart <= block.number < trackEnd.
        uint256 trackStart;
        uint256 trackEnd;

        // List of eligible nodes and their staking addresses.
        // Initialized by createTracker().
        address[] nodeIds;
        mapping(address => address) rewardToNodeId;
        mapping(address => address) stakingToNodeId;

        // Balances and voting powers.
        // Initialized by createTracker() and updated by refreshStake().
        mapping(address => uint256) stakingBalances;

>         mapping(address => uint256) nodeBalances;

Reviewer: @blukat29 What are the differences between stakingBalances and nodeBalances?

Reviewer: Seems like 
- stakingBalances; // stakingContract => its balance
- nodeBalances; // nodeId => total staking balance of a GC member

Reviewer 3: @kjhman21 You are right. I've added short comments in acfd52e.

        mapping(address => uint256) nodeVotes;
        uint256 totalVotes;
        uint256 eligibleNodes;
    }

    // Tracker objects. Added by createTracker().
    mapping(uint256 => Tracker) private trackers; // trackerId => Tracker
    uint256[] private allTrackerIds;

    // 1-to-1 mapping between nodeId and voter account.
    // Updated by refreshVoter().
    mapping(address => address) private nodeIdToVoter; // nodeId => voterAddr
    mapping(address => address) private voterToNodeId; // voterAddr => nodeId

    /// @dev Creates a new Tracker and populate initial values from AddressBook
    function createTracker(uint256 trackStart, uint256 trackEnd)
        external returns(uint256 trackerId);

    /// @dev Re-evaluate Tracker contents related to the staking contract
    /// Anyone can call this function, but `staking` must be a staking contract

>     /// registered to the AddressBook.

Reviewer: @blukat29 What if `staking` is not a staking account? or what if it is a staking account but it is not connected to the address book?

Reviewer 3: I'd like to let the implementation decide error handling policy.

As a side, what I would do is
- Reverts from `refreshStake()` call must not stop other functionality including stake withdrawl; Use `try-catch` or `.call()` to capture and silently ignore the revert.
- If CnStakingV2 is not registered to the AddressBook, then nothing gets written in `refreshStake()`.

Taken from my implementation:
```solidity
    /// @dev Refresh the balance of this contract recorded in StakingTracker
    /// This function should never revert.
    function safeRefreshStake() private {
        if (stakingTracker == address(0)) {
            return;
        }

        try IStakingTracker(stakingTracker).refreshStake(address(this)) {
        } catch {
        }
    }
```

    function refreshStake(address staking) external;

    /// @dev Re-evaluate voter account mapping related to the staking contract
    /// Anyone can call this function, but `staking` must be a staking contract
    /// registered to the AddressBook.
    function refreshVoter(address staking) external;

    /// @dev Return integer fields of a tracker
    function getTrackerSummary(uint256 trackerId) external view returns(
        uint256 trackStart,
        uint256 trackEnd,
        uint256 numNodes,
        uint256 totalVotes,
        uint256 eligibleNodes);

    /// @dev Return balances and votes of all nodes stored in a tracker
    function getAllTrackedNodes(uint256 trackerId) external view returns(
        address[] memory nodeIds,
        uint256[] memory nodeBalances,
        uint256[] memory nodeVotes);

    /// @dev Return the balance and votes of a specified node
    function getTrackedNode(uint256 trackerId, address nodeId) external view returns(
        uint256 nodeBalance,
        uint256 nodeVotes);

    /// @dev Find the node who owns the given voter account

>     function getNodeFromVoter(address voter) external view returns(address nodeId);

Reviewer: @blukat29 What if two difference nodeIds have the same voter account? Do you have any logic to prevent this?

Reviewer 3: Yes there is a logic to prevent this because node-voter is a 1-to-1 relation.
https://github.com/yeri-lee/kips/blob/33201dff2a121d0fa741edad113de3b0776bc9ea/KIPs/kip-81.md?plain=1#L378-L385
```solidity
        address newVoter = ICnStakingV2(staking).getVoterAddress();
        if (newVoter != address(0)) {
            require(voterToNodeId[newVoter] == address(0),
                    "Voter address already taken");
            voterToNodeId[newVoter] = nodeId;
            nodeIdToVoter[nodeId] = newVoter;
```

I've added a comment above `refreshVoter()` function. (https://github.com/klaytn/kips/commit/acfd52ebad8d79fd4e300bc034cf23dc501cba96)

    /// @dev Find the voter account of the given node
    function getVoterFromNode(address nodeId) external view returns(address voter);
}
```

#### Usage

A voting contract can utilize StakingTracker as follows.

1. When a governance proposal is submitted, the voting contract calls `createTracker()` to finalize eligible GC nodes list and evaluate voting powers.

> 2. Before `trackEnd` block, GCs stake or unstake their KLAYs from their CnStakingV2 contracts. The CnStakingV2 contracts will then call `refreshStake()` to notify balance change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Before `trackEnd` block, GCs stake or unstake their KLAYs from their CnStakingV2 contracts. The CnStakingV2 contracts will then call `refreshStake()` to notify the balance change.
```

3. GCs may change their voter account in their CnStakingV2 contracts. The CnStakingV2 contracts will then call `refreshVoter()` to notify voter account change.

> 4. After `trackEnd` block, the voting powers are frozen. The voting contract use StakingTracker getters to process votes casted by voter accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. After `trackEnd` block, the voting powers are frozen. The voting contract uses StakingTracker getters to process votes casted by voter accounts.
```

#### Example implementation

Below is an example implementation of `createTracker()`, `refreshStake()`, and `refreshVoter()` functions.

```solidity
abstract contract StakingTracker {
    function createTracker(uint256 trackStart, uint256 trackEnd)
        external override returns(uint256 trackerId)
    {

>         trackerId = allTrackerIds.length + 1;

Reviewer: trackerId starts from 1, not zero?

Reviewer 3: This particular example does start from 1 to align with proposalId.

However, the current KIP spec doesn't specify which number `trackerId` must start from. I think it's up to the implementation.

    }

    function populateFromAddressBook(Tracker storage tracker) private {
        (address[] memory nodeIds,
         address[] memory stakingContracts,
         address[] memory rewardAddrs, , ) = IAddressBook(ADDRESS_BOOK_ADDRESS()).getAllAddressInfo();

        // Group staking contracts by common reward address
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < nodeIds.length; i++) {
            address n = nodeIds[i];
            address s = stakingContracts[i];
            address r = rewardAddrs[i];
            if (tracker.rewardToNodeId[r] == address(0)) { // fresh rewardAddr
                tracker.nodeIds.push(n);
                tracker.rewardToNodeId[r] = n;
            } else { // previously appeared rewardAddr
                n = tracker.rewardToNodeId[r];
            }
            tracker.stakingToNodeId[s] = n;
            tracker.stakingBalances[s] = s.balance;
            tracker.nodeBalances[n] += s.balance;
        }
    }

    function calcAllVotes(Tracker storage tracker) private {
        tracker.totalVotes = 0;
        tracker.eligibleNodes = 0;
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < tracker.nodeIds.length; i++) {
            if (isNodeEligible(trackerId, tracker.nodeIds[i])) {

>                 tracker.eligibleNodes ++;

Reviewer: we don't need to store every counter to the storage. Why don't you use a memory variable and store it to the storage after all the computation is done?

Reviewer 3: Fixed in https://github.com/klaytn/kips/commit/acfd52ebad8d79fd4e300bc034cf23dc501cba96.

            }
        }
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < tracker.nodeIds.length; i++) {
            address nodeId = tracker.nodeIds[i];
            uint256 votes = calcVotes(tracker.eligibleNodes, tracker.nodeBalances[nodeId]);
            tracker.nodeVotes[nodeId] = votes;
            tracker.totalVotes += votes;
        }
    }

    function calcVotes(uint256 eligibleNodes, uint256 balance) private view returns(uint256) {
        uint256 voteCap = 1;
        if (eligibleNodes > 1) {
            voteCap = eligibleNodes - 1;
        }
        uint256 votes = balance / MIN_STAKE();
        if (votes > voteCap) {
            votes = voteCap;
        }
        return votes;
    }

    function refreshStake(address staking) external override {
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < allTrackerIds.length; i++) {

>             uint256 trackerId = liveTrackerIds[i];

Reviewer: liveTrackerIds is shown first here. `allTrackterIds` seems right?

Reviewer 3: Fixed in https://github.com/klaytn/kips/commit/acfd52ebad8d79fd4e300bc034cf23dc501cba96.

        require(nodeId != address(0), "not a staking contract");

        // Unlink existing two-way mapping
        address oldVoter = nodeIdToVoter[nodeId];
        if (oldVoter != address(0)) {
            voterToNodeId[oldVoter] = address(0);
            nodeIdToVoter[nodeId] = address(0);
        }
        // Create new mapping
        address newVoter = ICnStakingV2(staking).getVoterAddress();
        if (newVoter != address(0)) {
            require(voterToNodeId[newVoter] == address(0),
                    "Voter address already taken");
            voterToNodeId[newVoter] = nodeId;
            nodeIdToVoter[nodeId] = newVoter;
        }
    }

    function resolveStakingFromAddressBook(address staking)
        private view returns(address)
    {
        (address[] memory nodeIds,
         address[] memory stakingContracts,
         address[] memory rewardAddrs, , ) = IAddressBook(ADDRESS_BOOK_ADDRESS()).getAllAddressInfo();

        address rewardAddr;
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < nodeIds.length; i++) {
            if (stakingContracts[i] == staking) {
                rewardAddr = rewardAddrs[i];
                break;
            }
        }

>         if (rewardAddr != address(0)) {

Reviewer: hmm it seems weird... if reward address is not zero, return zero..?!

Reviewer 3: The condition is unnecessary. Deleted in acfd52e.

            return address(0);
        }
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < nodeIds.length; i++) {
            if (rewardAddrs[i] == rewardAddr) {
                return nodeIds[i];
            }
        }
        return address(0);
    }
```

### Voting

> The Voting contract operates the on-chain governance votes. Voting contract, stores governance proposals, counts casted votes, and send on-chain transactions. Its design is influenced by [Compound Finance](https://docs.compound.finance/v2/governance/) and [OpenZeppelin](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/4.x/api/governance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Voting contract operates the on-chain governance votes. The Voting contract stores governance proposals, counts casted votes, and sends on-chain transactions. Its design is influenced by [Compound Finance](https://docs.compound.finance/v2/governance/) and [OpenZeppelin](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/4.x/api/governance).
```

A proposal contains textual descriptions and optionally on-chain transactions. The transactions are executed on behalf of the voting contract if the proposal receives enough votes.

While GCs hold their voting rights from staked KLAYs, a special secretariat account manages the overall on-chain governance process. Governance proposals can be submitted by the secretariat account, or any GC if the secretariat account is not set. The secretariat account can be updated by on-chain governance.

#### Voting steps

> Under the default timing settings, a typical governance proposal is handeled as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the default timing settings, a typical governance proposal is handled as follows.
```

> 1. When a governance proposal is submitted, it enters a 7 days of preparation period where GCs can adjust their voting powers by staking or unstaking KLAYs. Voter lists (i.e. GCs) are finalized at the moment of proposal submission. However, voting powers are finalized at the end of preparation period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. When a governance proposal is submitted, it enters a 7-day preparation period where GCs can adjust their voting powers by staking or unstaking KLAYs. The list of voters (i.e., GCs) is finalized at the moment of proposal submission. However, voting powers are finalized at the end of preparation period.
```

> 2. A 7 days of voting period immediately follows after preparation period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. A 7-day voting period immediately follows after the preparation period.
```

3. If there are enough Yes votes, the transactions can be queued within 7 days after voting ends.

> 4. The transaction is delayed by 2 days to be executable. This delay gives the ecosystem enough time to adjust to then change and perform final review about transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The transaction is delayed by 2 days to be executable. This delay gives the ecosystem enough time to apply the changes to their products and perform final review about transactions.
```

> perform final review about transactions.

@blukat29 Who are the reviewers?

Reviewer 3: There are no designated reviewers. Perhaps the proposer who may cancel, and people with execute rights who may choose to not execute, can review.

> 5. After the delay, the transaction can be executed within 7 days.

Reviewer: The transaction can be executed autonomously or by a secretariat account?

Reviewer 3: It must be executed by the secretariat account within the 7 days window.

![voting steps](../assets/kip-81/voting_steps.png)

#### Timing settings

Proposal timeline is dictated by several timing settings below. The settings are expressed in
block numbers. The number of days in below table is calculated based on 1 block/sec assumption.

| Name           | Meaning                                                      | Default Value   |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| `votingDelay`  | Delay from proposal submission to voting start               | 604800 (7 days) |
| `votingPeriod` | Duration of the voting                                       | 604800 (7 days) |
| `queueTimeout` | Grace period to queue() passed proposals                     | 604800 (7 days) |
| `execDelay`    | A minimum delay before a queued transaction can be executed  | 172800 (2 days) |
| `execTimeout`  | Grace period to execute() queued proposals since `execDelay` | 604800 (7 days) |

#### Quorum

A proposal passes when a combination of the following conditions are met.

- `CountQuorum` = At least 1/3 of all eligible voters cast vote
- `PowerQuorum` = At least 1/3 of all eligible voting powers cast vote

> - `MajorityYes` = Yes votes is more than half of casted votes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MajorityYes` = Yes votes are more than half of casted votes
```

> - `Pass = (CountQuorum or PowerQuorum) and MajorityYes`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PassCondition = (CountQuorum or PowerQuorum) and MajorityYes`
```

## Motivation
The new on-chain voting mechanism discloses GC’s opinion transparently through the portal, allowing anyone to view the result. The governance agenda discussed in Klaytn Governance Forum will be voted on the governance portal, Klaytn Square. Since the voting power is calculated based on the staking amount, this voting process provides more power to GC members who share the same interest as Klaytn by staking and locking up more KLAYs.

## Specification
Klaytn Governance Forum is to freely propose and discuss Klaytn governance items. Once Klaytn Square, the governance portal, opens, the on-chain voting will be executed based on the discussion held in this forum.

Klaytn Square includes the following functions:
- Ability to vote on a governance agenda and view the voting process

> - Information about Governance Councils: description, contract address, notice, and staking status, staking and reward history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Information about Governance Councils: description, contract address, notice, staking status, staking and reward history, etc.
```

or you should add 'and' at the last item of the list.

- View the history of governance agenda and Governance Councils

![voting process diagram](../assets/kip-81/voting_process_diagram.png)

> The foundation will provide 7 days of preparation period for voting, providing a time for GC to adjust the staking amount. With the start of the voting, the foundation will announce the list of GC members and their voting power. GC will have 7 days of the voting period.

Reviewer: How do the foundation announce the list of GC members and their voting power?
through Klaytn Square? Will Klaytn Square have the functionality?

Reviewer 3: Yes, Klaytn Square has the functionality. For each proposal, list of eligible voters and their voting powers are displayed. It will use the `StakingTracker.getAllTrackedNodes()` function.

Reviewer: @blukat29 okay great. Thanks for the answer.

The Klaytn governance voting system is designed based on the following fundamental premises.
- Klaytn’s major decision-making process should reflect the opinions of as many participants as possible from the ecosystem.
- Participants will be more likely to make a decision that is beneficial to the Klaytn ecosystem if they hold more KLAY. This is based on the premise that the growth of Klaytn’s ecosystem is correlated to the rise in the value of KLAY.
- The governance system should be able to manage the situations in which a particular entity makes an arbitrary decision. This is because the entity may weaken the sustainability of the entire network.
- The act of voting and the gain of voting power is different.

> Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive. Therefore, A GC member will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 5 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a member can own is one less than the total number of GC members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. This cap structure prevents potential monopolies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recognizing a tendency that the member with more KLAY makes a decision that benefits the Klaytn ecosystem in the long run, we are granting a higher voting power to members with more KLAY. Yet, to prevent a particular subject from making an arbitrary decision, we are placing a cap on the voting power one can receive at the maximum. Therefore, a GC member will receive 1 vote per a certain amount of staked KLAY (initial configuration: 5 million KLAY). The maximum number of votes a member can own is one less than the total number of GC members. In other words, [Maximum Voting Power =  Total number of GC members - 1]. For example, if there are 35 GC members, one can own a maximum of 34 voting power. This cap structure prevents potential monopolies.
```

### Smart Contracts Overview

The Klaytn on-chain governance voting will be conducted on smart contracts. Several contracts and accounts interact together in the process. The below diagram shows the relationship between contracts and accounts.

- Contracts

>   - **AddressBook**: An existing contract that stores the list of GC nodes, their staking contracts, and their reward recipient addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **AddressBook**: an existing contract that stores the list of GC nodes, their staking contracts, and their reward recipient addresses.
```

> When a colon introduces a phrase or an incomplete sentence that is meant to add information to the sentence before it, do not capitalize the first word after the colon unless it is a proper noun.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-after-colons/?gclid=Cj0KCQjwqoibBhDUARIsAH2OpWhE-gzyEy2pNRqaLoWWNGIU3UKidMU0gYnNFUJHzTSOjb97RkjvO6AaAhylEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds

>   - **CnStakingV2**: An updated version of the existing CnStakingContract. GCs stake their KLAYs to earn rights to validate blocks and cast on-chain votes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **CnStakingV2**: an updated version of the existing CnStakingContract. GCs stake their KLAYs to earn rights to validate blocks and cast on-chain votes.
```

>   - **StakingTracker**: A new contract that tracks voting-related data from AddressBook and CnStakingV2 contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **StakingTracker**: a new contract that tracks voting-related data from AddressBook and CnStakingV2 contracts.
```

>   - **Voting**: A new contract that processes the on-chain voting. It stores governance proposals, counts votes, and sends approved transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Voting**: a new contract that processes the on-chain voting. It stores governance proposals, counts votes, and sends approved transactions.
```

- Accounts

>   - **AddressBook admins**: A set of accounts controlled by the Foundation which can manage the list of GCs in the AddressBook. AddressBook admin is managed in the AddressBook contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **AddressBook admins**: a set of accounts controlled by the Foundation which can manage the list of GCs in the AddressBook. AddressBook admins are managed in the AddressBook contract.
```

>   - **CnStaking admins**: A set of accounts controlled by each GC that can manage the staked KLAYs and its voter account. CnStaking admins are managed in the respective CnStakingV2 contracts. Note that every CnStakingV2 contract has a different set of admins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **CnStaking admins**: a set of accounts controlled by each GC member that can manage the staked KLAYs and its voter account. CnStaking admins are managed in the respective CnStakingV2 contracts. Note that every CnStakingV2 contract has a different set of admins.
```

>   - **Voter account**: An account controlled by each GC that can cast on-chain votes. But this account cannot withdraw KLAYs from CnStakingV2 contracts. Voter account is appointed at CnStakingV2 contracts of the respective GC member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Voter account**: an account controlled by each GC member that can cast on-chain votes. But this account cannot withdraw KLAYs from CnStakingV2 contracts. A Voter account is appointed at CnStakingV2 contracts of the respective GC member.
```

@blukat29 Can a GC member appoint multiple voter accounts?

Reviewer 3: No, they cannot. If they want such use cases, they can use contract-based multisig like Gnosis Safe.

Reviewer: @blukat29 Okay. got it. Only single voter account.

>   - **Secretariat account**: An account controlled by the Foundation which can propose and execute on-chain governance proposals. The secretariat account is managed in the Voting contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Secretariat account**: an account controlled by the Foundation which can propose and execute on-chain governance proposals. The secretariat account is managed in the Voting contract.
```

```solidity
abstract contract CnStakingV2 {
    event UpdateStakingTracker(address stakingTracker);
    event UpdateVoterAddress(address voterAddress);

    IStakingTracker public stakingTracker;
    address public voterAddress;

    /// @dev Set the initial stakingTracker address
    /// Emits an UpdateStakingTracker event.
    /// This function only works before contract initialization
    function setStakingTracker(address _tracker) external beforeInit;

    /// @dev Update the StakingTracker address this contract points to
    /// Emits an UpdateStakingTracker event.
    function submitUpdateStakingTracker(address _tracker) external;
    function updateStakingTracker(address _tracker) external onlyMultisigTx;

    /// @dev Update the voter address of this GC
    /// Emits an UpdateVoterAddress event.
    function submitUpdateVoterAddress(address _addr) external;
    function updateVoterAddress(address _addr) external onlyMultisigTx;
}
```

#### Notifying changes to StakingTracker

> To notify balance and voter account changes to StakingTracker contract, CnStakingV2 contract shall call the StakingTracker whenever after every change. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To notify balance and voter account changes to the StakingTracker contract, the CnStakingV2 contract shall call StakingTracker after every change. For example,
```

        bool queued;            // true if successfully queue()d
        bool executed;          // true if successfully execute()d
    }
    mapping(uint256 => Proposal) proposals;

    function state(uint256 proposalId) external view returns (ProposalState) {
        Proposal storage p = proposals[proposalId];

        if (p.executed) {
            return ProposalState.Executed;
        } else if (p.canceled) {
            return ProposalState.Canceled;
        } else if (block.number < p.voteStart) {
            return ProposalState.Pending;
        } else if (block.number <= p.voteEnd) {
            return ProposalState.Active;
        } else if (!checkQuorum(proposalId)) {
            return ProposalState.Failed;
        }

        if (!p.queued) {
            if (block.number <= p.queueDeadline) {
                return ProposalState.Passed;
            } else {
                return ProposalState.Expired;
            }
        } else {
            if (block.number <= p.execDeadline) {
                return ProposalState.Queued;
            } else {
                return ProposalState.Expired;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

#### Executing transactions

> The transactions in a passed proposal are executed in a order they appear in the `propose()` function arguments.  Each transaction is sent to `targets[i]`, carrying `values[i]` of KLAYs, with `calldatas[i]` as input data. Below is an example of `execute()` function.

Reviewer: hmm can we check the data integrity? For example if the data is somewhat wrong, it could not be executed as we expected. How can we prevent the situtation?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps the secretariat can try `klay_call("Voting.execute(id)")` to see if it reverts. Though the secretariat can try only after execDelay.

```solidity
abstract contract Voting {
    struct Proposal {
        address[] targets;
        uint256[] values;
        bytes[] calldatas;

    }
    mapping(uint256 => Proposal) proposals;

    function execute(uint256 proposalId) external {
        Proposal storage p = proposals[proposalId];

        for (uint256 i = 0; i < p.targets.length; i++) {
            (bool success, bytes memory result) =
                    p.targets[i].call{value: p.values[i]}(p.calldatas[i]);
            require(success, "Transaction failed");
        }
    }
}
```

## Rationale

#### CnStakingV2 and StakingTracker instead of standard ERC20Votes

It is common for DAOs to manage their governance tokens in a [ERC20Votes](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/4.x/api/token/erc20#ERC20Votes) contract. However new contracts CnStakingV2 and StakingTracker were used to manage staked KLAYs. Using the new contracts provides better compatibility with ecosystem Dapps like public staking services. It also does not break the existing block validator selection algorithm that depends on AddressBook.

#### StakingTracker refreshStake and refreshVoting has no access control

> Another desion options was to restrict those funtions to only CnStakingV2 contracts. But those functions are publicly open to allow GCs to gradually migrate from CnStakingContract to CnStakingV2 contracts. Old CnStakingContract does not notify StakingTracker about its balance change, in which case manually calling `refreshStake()` can notify the change.

Reviewer: @blukat29 
Can I understand this like:
Even if a GC member wants to use CnStakingContract, then they can use it with manual call of refreshStake() of StakingTracker. Is this right? no other side effects expected?

Reviewer 3: Yes, you are right. I designed it so that staking contracts can be optionally & gradually upgraded.

If a GC member uses old CnStakingContract,
- Do not call `refreshStake()` at all -> The initial balance at `createTracker()`, or `propose()` is used.
- Do call `refreshStake()` -> The balance change during the preparation period is recognized.

Calling `refreshStake()` only affects the preparation period. I guess most GC members don't frequently change their stake amounts, thus there is little need to call it. However, they can choose to utilize the preparation period.

#### Separate voter account

> In security standpoint, it is safer to have separate accounts for different roles. Existing CnStakingV2 admins take financial roles - withdrawing staked KLAYs - and the voter account take voting role only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In security standpoint, it is safer to have separate accounts for different roles. Existing CnStakingV2 admins take financial roles - withdrawing staked KLAYs - and the voter account takes voting role only.
```

#### Proposals have expired state

Proposal transactions expires if they are not queued or executed within deadline. This guarantees the timeliness of the transactions. If a proposal was left unexecuted for a long time, the proposal might be irrelevant anymore and require a fresh proposal.

## Expected Effect

The proposed GC Voting method is expected to produce the following changes:
- All members in Klaytn ecosystem grow together with credibility
- Providing obligation and authority to GC motivates active participation in governance voting activities and the KLAY staking
- Anyone can easily view the proposals and voting status through the governance portal. It encourages holders to participate and give responsibility and authority to GCs.
- The Klaytn network can take a step closer to transparency and decentralized networks.

## Backward Compatibility

> - GCs should deploy new CnStakingV2 contracts and move their staked KLAYs. Existing CnStaking contract balances are excluded from voting power calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- GCs should deploy new CnStakingV2 contracts and move their staked KLAYs. Existing CnStaking contract balances are excluded from voting power calculation. However, GCs can make the balance of existing CnStakingContract to be included in the staked KLAYs by calling `refreshStake` manually.
```

- However, block validator selection is not affected by the change, so GCs can still participate in consensus before migrating to CnStakingV2.

## Reference
n/a

## Copyright

> Copyright and related rights waived via CC0<https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
```

        uint256 voteStart,      // propose()d block + votingDelay
        uint256 voteEnd,        // voteStart + votingPeriod
        uint256 queueDeadline,  // voteEnd + queueTimeout
        uint256 eta,            // queue()d block + execDelay
        uint256 execDeadline,   // queue()d block + execDelay + execTimeout
        bool canceled,          // true if successfully cancel()ed
        bool queued,            // true if successfully queue()d
        bool executed           // true if successfully execute()d
    );

    /// @dev Vote counting related properties of a proposal
    function getProposalTally(uint256 proposalId) external view returns(
        uint256 totalYes,
        uint256 totalNo,
        uint256 totalAbstain,
        uint256 quorumCount,      // required number of voters
        uint256 quorumPower,      // required number of voting powers
        address[] memory voters,  // list of nodeIds who voted
    )

    /// @dev Individual vote receipt
    function getReceipt(uint256 proposalId, address voter)
        external view returns(Receipt memory);
}
```

#### Fetching votes from StakingTracker

> Calculating votes require information from StakingTracker contract. The Voting contract shall utilize the getters to find voting powers of each voters as well as quorum conditions. Below is an example implementation of `castVote()` and `checkQuorum()` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calculating votes requires information from StakingTracker contract. The Voting contract shall utilize the getters to find voting powers of each voters as well as quorum conditions. Below is an example implementation of `castVote()` and `checkQuorum()` functions.
```
